# Social Media, The Attention Economy, and Mental Health

## Executive Summary


## Introduction
Social media often feels like a mainstay of life today, with 59.4% of the population actively engaging with it in some way (*The Changing World of Digital In 2023*, 2023). Social media itself is certainly not new, with numerous social networking sites appearing from the 1980s onwards, such as AmericaOnline in 1985, Friendster in 2001, and Facebook in 2004 (*The Evolution of Social Media: How Did It Begin and Where Could It Go Next?*, 2020). Social media use has seen increase from 1 hour 37  minutes in 2013 to 2 hours and 31 minutes in 2022 (*The Changing World of Digital In 2023*, 2023), while experience of a mental health condition has seen a 13% increase over the same timeframe (WHO, 2023). This has lead some researchers to explore whether the two are connected with varying results.

In one literature review “social media envy” was found to be linked to levels of depression and anxiety, however other mediating factors were identified as having influence over these outcomes (Karim *et al.*, 2020). Another review found that social media offered the opportunity to build and maintain relationships for individuals who may struggle to do so face-to-face due to serious mental health conditions, and in that sense acts as a protective factor against the known negative impacts of loneliness and isolation (Naslund *et al.*, 2020). Conversely, increased social media usage is linked to reduced face-to-face interaction, which is a behaviour often indicative of addiction (Kuss and Griffiths, 2011). This has lead some to question the ethics of companies utilising psychological techniques and adaptive algorithms to essentially make social media addictive in an effort to fuel the attention economy (Bhargava and Velasquez, 2021).

This project uses a publicly available dataset to explore what impacts, if any, social media use has on several mental health outcomes. It also looks at whether social media usage can be used to predict mental health outcomes, both in terms of platforms used and time spent online.

## Methodology
<a href="https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/souvikahmed071/social-media-and-mental-health?select=smmh.csv">Raw data</a> was sourced from Kaggle. The data was collected via a survey asking about social media use and symptoms of depression, anxiety, and ADHD , and about self-esteem. These questions were rated on a 5-point Likert scale (Joshi *et al.*, 2015) to quantify symptom severity. Analysis was done using a multivariate multiple linear regression, using hours spent online and total platforms in use as predictors of ADHD, depression, anxiety, and self esteem measures. Cleaning, exploration, and analysis of the data was done via Python in Colab which can be accessed <a href="https://github.com/ookadeet/dspp1/blob/main/smmh.ipynb">here</a>. 
